around the globe. We from the Royal
Scottish Dragoon are currently
deployed out here in Poland, we want
to take this moment to clap to show
our appreciation to all the doctors,
nurses, GPs and carers in their
fight against the virus. From all of
fight against the vims. From all of
us, thank you.
fight against the virus. From all of
us, thank you. We are the first
Fusiliers battle group deployed as
part of the United Nations forward
presence. We would like to take a
moment of our day to say a massive
thank you to all those in the NHS
and although supporting the NHS back
at home. You guys are in the fight
of your lives, protecting our
friends and families against the
coronavirus. You’ve got this, keep
“P
up the good work and all the
Fusiliers behind you. APPLAUSE
STUDIO: A show of support, a
national round of applause for all
NHS staff working tirelessly to save
NHS staff working tirelassly to save
lives in
NHS staff working tirelessly to save
lives in the fight against the
coronavirus. We will be back with
all the latest at ten o’clock.
all the latest at ten o’clock. Now
we join
wejoin Fiona Bruce for question
we join Fiona Bmce for question
Time.
Good evening and welcome to question
time.
On tonight’s panel, Robert
On tonight’s panel, RobertJenrick,
On tonight’s panel, Robert jenrick,
the
On tonight’s panel, RobertJenrick,
the government Secretary of State
for communities, housing and local
for communities, housing and [oral
government. A
for communities, housing and local
government. A member of Labour’s
front bench since 2011, Emily
Thornberry. Humphrey Cobbold, chief
executive of PureGym, the company’s
executive of PureGym, the companrs
largest chain of
executive of PureGym, the company’s
largest chain of gyms. And Richard
Horton, deputy editor in chief of
the Lancet. We were all
the Lancet. We were alljust
the lancet. We were all just
watching
the Lancet. We were alljust
watching that round of applause and
in our little studio we want to give
a clap, don’t we? For the health and
rare
care workers. That is our little
rare workers. That is our little
tribute.
care workers. That is our little
tribute. Thank you very much indeed.
I want to say for anybody who was
watching last week, here we are
again with no audience for good
reasons in these very strange and
frightening time is back for all of
us. We have four panellists in order
to have suitable social distancing.
We were going to be in Shrewsbury
this week, but we can’t be there,
but we have asked the people of
Shrewsbury to send in questions to
ask, so we will be seeing them this
evening. But we are also live, so if
you would like to put any questions
to the panel, contact us in the
usual way. I will read as many of
those as we can. Our first question
those as we ran. Our first question
this evening is
those as we can. Our first question
this evening is from Mark Harrison,
a plumber from
3 plumberfrom Shrewsbury. As a
a plumberfrom Shrewsbury. As a
self—employed tradesmen I was
self-employed tradesman I was
awaiting
self—employed tradesmen I was
awaiting the Chancellor’s speech to
unveil his support package. After
listening to what he had to say I
feel frustrated and angry. I am one
feel fmstrated and angry. I am one
of those
feel frustrated and angry. I am one
of those self—employed people who
of those self-employed peopla who
has
of those self—employed people who
has less than 12 months’ books and
has lass than 12 months’ books and
in his words,
has less than 12 months’ books and
in his words, he stated, we cannot
help you. The Universal Credit
option will not help me cover my
rent, pay my bills, put food on the
table.
tabla. We
rent, pay my bills, put food on the
table. We do not know how long this
tabla. We do not know how long this
is going to last
table. We do not know how long this
is going to last or how long I will
be unemployed for. Why couldn’t
be unemployed for. why couldn’t
nothing he
be unemployed for. Why couldn’t
nothing he put in place to help
support us using our bank accounts,
and invoices. Or
and invoices. Orare you
support us using our bank accounts,
and invoices. Or are you TR.
and invoices. Orare you TR. Unique
and invoices. Or are you TR. Unique
tax
and invoices. Orare you TR. Unique
tax reference. Rishi Sunak said
today he would not leave anyone
behind. First of all, can I say,
behind. First of all, ran I say,
along with the
behind. First of all, can I say,
along with the millions across the
country, thank you to the NHS. They
are doing an heroic
are doing an heroicjob and deserve
are doing an heroic job and deserve
all of our
are doing an heroicjob and deserve
all of our support in the days and
weeks ahead. But this crisis is
having an impact beyond public
health and it is putting a lot of
peopla into
people into difficult situations,
peopla into difficult situations,
like
people into difficult situations,
like the gentleman we have just
heard from, who are concerned about
their livelihoods. We made a promise
that we would do everything it takes
to support them. We have put in
place an unprecedented package of
measures to support the economy and
we did that in the budget and we did
it a week later
it a week laterfor
we did that in the budget and we did
it a week later for businesses and
individuals. The Chancellor tonight
has said what we are going to do for
the self—employed and he has made a
the self-employed and he has made a
big
the self—employed and he has made a
big commitment, which is for the
vast majority of self—employed
vast majority of self-employed
peopla,
vast majority of self—employed
people, round about 95%, we will
peopla, round about 9596, we will
offer to pay
people, round about 95%, we will
offer to pay 80% of their earnings,
offer to pay 8096 of their earnings,
looking back
offer to pay 80% of their earnings,
looking back over the last three
79575- “P
years, up to £2500 every month, up
to earnings of £50,000. Only those
earning more than £50,000 will not
be eligibla for
be eligible for the scheme. It is
very difficult from an
administrative... It is not people
administrative... It is not peopla
earning
administrative... It is not people
earning £50,000 and above. He is
self employed and he has not got
accounts for a year or more and has
been left high and dry. The scheme
will apply to a 95% of those
self—employed and those earning over
self-employed and those earning over
£50,000
self—employed and those earning over
£50,000 will not be eligible to stop
£50,000 will not be eligibla to stop
we are asking
£50,000 will not be eligible to stop
we are asking people to provide
three years’ worth of earnings. We
have said, however, we will look at
what ever you have got. It is easier
to operate the scheme if you come to
us with three years’ earnings. That
is the commitment we made today. But
if you do not have that, we will do
whatever we can to support you. I
whatever we ran to support you. I
would urge
whatever we can to support you. I
would urge people in that situation
would urge peopla in that situation
to give us
would urge people in that situation
to give us what they have got and we
will work through it with HMRC to
see if there is a way to support
you. This is a difficult scheme to
implement. People who are
self—employed will appreciate that.
self-employed will appreciate that.
It is
self—employed will appreciate that.
It is much harder
It is much harderfrom an
It is much harder from an
operational
It is much harderfrom an
operational perspective, than to
create a scheme for employees where
you ran easily
you can easily see what they are
you ran easily see what they are
earning, and
you can easily see what they are
earning, and we can see the link
earning, and we ran see the link
between
earning, and we can see the link
between them and their employer.
Here we have to design a scheme that
is deliverable. It would be wrong to
raise false hope and pretend this is
simple. The Chancellor has designed
a scheme that can help get that
a scheme that ran help get that
money to
a scheme that can help get that
money to those people. If you do not
money to those peopla. If you do not
have
money to those people. If you do not
have those records, still give us
what you have got. Even if you do
not have a year’s accounts, you can
not have a year’s accounts, you ran
still go to the
not have a year’s accounts, you can
still go to the government to see if
you are eligible? Yes, we cannot
promise, but we will see what we can
promise, but we will see what we ran
give them with
promise, but we will see what we can
give them with what they have got to
see if it can apply to them. Emily?
see if it ran apply to them. Emily?
I am not
see if it can apply to them. Emily?
I am not pretending this is not
difficult. It is important to
acknowledge the assistance the
government has given and they have
done a great deal and it has been
very radical. However, self—employed
very radical. However, self-employed
people are in a
very radical. However, self—employed
people are in a great variety of
peopla are in a great variety of
jobs and it is a
people are in a great variety of
jobs and it is a difficult scheme to
get up and running. What the
get up and mnning. what the
government
get up and running. What the
government has been tempted to do,
and I understand why, is to do a
nice, neat headline, worked for
three years, you will get 80% up to
three years, you will get 8096 up to
2500.
three years, you will get 80% up to
2500. But self—employed people fit
2500. But self-employed peopla fit
into many
2500. But self—employed people fit
into many different categories.
There are a number of problems that
are immediately obvious. The first
is they will not get any money until
june, so there
June, so there will be a lot of
self—employed people who will not
self-employed peopla who will not
have
self—employed people who will not
have had money since February. We
have a tweet from Katie Rose
Bennett, 3
Bennett, a singer songwriter. Is
March the 26 and the beginning of
june is a long
June is a long time away for all the
self—employed people I know. What do
self-employed peopla I know. what do
you expect us
self—employed people I know. What do
you expect us to eat? Exactly, that
is part of the problem. Mark in
particular, a self—employed plumber,
particular, a self-employed plumber,
he works
particular, a self—employed plumber,
he works in construction, and there
he works in constmction, and there
is a question
he works in construction, and there
is a question about whether or not
he is supposed to be working. Is he
an essential worker or we have seen
people up and down the country,
there is one in my constituency
where people are building luxury
where peopla are building luxury
ﬂats.
where people are building luxury
flats. We
where peopla are building luxury
ﬂats. We get
where people are building luxury
flats. We get a number of different
ﬂats. We get a number of different
problems
flats. We get a number of different
problems colliding in this. Whilst
problams colliding in this. whilst
the
problems colliding in this. Whilst
the government comes out with
headlines, saying we will not leave
anyone behind, the nitty—gritty is
anyone behind, the nitty-gritty is
quite often
anyone behind, the nitty—gritty is
quite often that life is more
complicated and they need to keep
coming back with adjustments and I
just hope that they listen to the
opposition when we do raise some of
these problems and they do work with
us in order to be able to sort it
out. There are a variety of things
that have not been sorted out. Mark
will now need to perhaps apply for
Universal Credit. But if he applies
for it, he does not get any money
for the first five weeks, that is
part of the system. Those who are
applying, I had a constituent tweak
me a photograph of where he was on
the waiting list when he was ringing
“P
up and he had 99,000 people in front
up and he had 99,000 peopla in front
of him, and he
up and he had 99,000 people in front
of him, and he was going to have to
wait for hours to speak to anybody
to even apply to go on to Universal
Credit. This is the reality of
people’s lives. I am not pretending
people’s lives. lam not pretending
it is not hard,
people’s lives. I am not pretending
it is not hard, but I am saying that
more needs to be done and the
government needs to go further. When
government needs to go further. when
you think about
government needs to go further. When
you think about the people who work
you think about the peopla who work
in your gym, a
you think about the people who work
in your gym, 3 lot of the trainers
in your gym, a lot of the trainers
are
in your gym, 3 lot of the trainers
are self—employed, what has happened
are self-employed, what has happened
with you in
are self—employed, what has happened
with you in terms of your staff?
This topic is very important to us
and I was pleased to see the steps
the Chancellor made this evening in
terms of putting together a package
for self—employed people. But
for self—employed people. Butl
for self-employed peopla. Butl
would
for self—employed people. Butl
would echo some of the views Emily
Reyes, that it is a complex
situation. The average tenure of our
trainers is typically about eight or
nine months. Many of them will not
have had the trading history. Many
of them are recently qualified and
new to the game of being
self—employed, so they might not be
self-employed, so they might not be
familiar
self—employed, so they might not be
familiar with many of the features
required. Certainly they will have
been watching this very carefully,
we are talking about nearly 3000
we are talking about hearty 3000
peopla in
we are talking about nearly 3000
people in our business, so a
substantial number. They are
typirallv
typically young, very concerned
about their future. Our business
about theirfuture. Our business had
about their future. Our business had
to dose
about theirfuture. Our business had
to close down on Friday night after
the Prime Minister asked us to. The
whole business closed down within
whola business closed down within
ten
whole business closed down within
ten hours. A business that took us
ten years to build closed down ten
hours. I have tremendous respect for
my colleagues all across our
business. Other businesses are
business. other businesses are
experiencing
business. Other businesses are
experiencing same and we closed down
with goodwill because we knew it
would have to happen. We have had
peopla dose
people close down their place of
peopla close down their place of
work
people close down their place of
work and
peopla close down their place of
work and put
people close down their place of
work and put themselves into
1009an
jeopardy for the future and it is a
very challenging thing for them to
very challanging thing for them to
have
very challenging thing for them to
have done. We will be supporting
them and helping them with the
interpretation of the package that
the Chancellor has put together. I
am glad to hear
am glad to hearfrom Robert that
am glad to hear from Robert that
there
am glad to hearfrom Robert that
there will be attention paid to
people who might not have had the
perfect trading history, to help
them understand what might be done
for them. We will be playing our
part as much as we can, we are
part as much as we ran, we are
absolutely
part as much as we can, we are
absolutely committed to try to help
them in every way that we can as
them in every way that we ran as
part of our
them in every way that we can as
part of our overall ecosystem as a
business. Richard, it is so
important that people feel they can
important that peopla feel they ran
afford
important that people feel they can
afford to be off work if at all
afford to be offer ifatall
possibla in
afford to be off work if at all
possible in order
possible in orderfor the maximum
possible in order for the maximum
number
possible in orderfor the maximum
number of us to stay at home? One of
the lessons of this epidemic is the
connectedness we all feel to one
another. My health depends upon your
health, your health depends upon my
health. We share that comment worth
in our society. Maybe when we have
got through this whole period that
got through this whola period that
is one
got through this whole period that
is one of the lessons that will come
is one of the lassons that will come
out of this,
is one of the lessons that will come
out of this, that we understand the
collective dose of society, and we
collactive dose of society, and we
will all
collective dose of society, and we
will all have to invest more in our
society, in social protection for
our society, in the NHS,
oursociety, in the NHS, in
society, in social protection for
our society, in the NHS, in an
education system, to give us that
security. Not the national security
in the conventional way we think
about it, but the human Security
that we need to protect ourselves
from some of the shocks all around
us. Maybe that is one of the
benefits that we will see from this,
that interdependence every single
human being has in this country and
across the planet.
This is what Beverly Smith had to
This is what Beverty Smith had to
say. Good
This is what Beverly Smith had to
say. Good evening, I am from
Shrewsbury, I am
Shrewsbury, lam Beverley. I
say. Good evening, I am from
Shrewsbury, lam Beverley. Ifind
myself in an unfortunate position at
the moment. I have recently
the moment. I have recentlyjust
the moment. I have recently just
lost my job in
the moment. I have recentlyjust
lost myjob in the travel industry.
lost my job in the travel industry.
I was let go, we
lost myjob in the travel industry.
I was let go, we had flooding in the
I was let go, we had ﬂooding in the
town and
I was let go, we had flooding in the
town and also now COVID—19. I do
town and also now COVID-19. I do
have
town and also now COVID—19. I do
have underlying health conditions,
have undertying health conditions,
so I am
have underlying health conditions,
so I am now actually self isolating.
I am unable to work for probably
I am unabla to work for probably
looks
I am unable to work for probably
looks like 12 weeks. Had
looks like 12 weeks. Had stayed on,
the company would have been able to
pay 8096 of my
pay 80% of my wages, however this is
pay 8096 of my wages, however this is
not the
pay 80% of my wages, however this is
not the case and now I find myself
not the use and now I find myself
on
not the case and now I find myself
on Universal Credit and unable to
on Universal Credit and unabla to
pay anything.
on Universal Credit and unable to
pay anything. My question really is,
how or what help is out there for me
so I ran get
so I can get through this really
uncertain time and lessen my
anxieties, basically? Following on
from what Beverley said, let me read
from what Beverlay said, let me read
you some more.
from what Beverley said, let me read
you some more. Joe says, what about
you some more. joe says, what about
sunplv
you some more. Joe says, what about
supply teachers? We work for
agencies and do not fit in any box,
we need help now. Claire Holmes, I
am a self—employed travel agent and
am a self-employed travel agent and
started my
am a self—employed travel agent and
started my business in November
after 25 years being employed. I
have lost every penny I have made
and now I have no support from the
government. Another supply teacher
talking here. As everyone is saying,
Robert, no one is claiming this is
simpla, far
simple, farfrom it, but as Rishi
simpla, far from it, but as Rishi
Sunak said,
simple, farfrom it, but as Rishi
Sunak said, people will have to wait
Sunak said, peopla will have to wait
until at
Sunak said, people will have to wait
until at least
until at leastJune, they will not
until at leastjune, they will not
have any
until at leastJune, they will not
have any money coming in before
then. If they apply for Universal
Credit, we are talking about £73 a
week after five weeks. Matt Hancock
said he could not live on that. Is
there not a simpler way? I am
thinking perhaps in Ireland,
everyone who has lost their
everyone who has lost theirjob, be
they employed or self—employed, has
they employed or self-employed, has
been given
they employed or self—employed, has
been given 350 euros a week, just
straightforward and simple. Would
that not cut through this?
For the self—employed we are taking
For the self-employed we are taking
steps beyond
For the self—employed we are taking
steps beyond what the Chancellor
announced today. I would like the
scheme to be able to support people
sooner but we need to make this a
deliverable scheme that is actually
going to work and the experts at
HMRC think that is unfortunately the
amount of time it takes to get the
scheme operational. We don’t want to
raise false hopes, we need to give
people certainty about when they can
people certainty about when they ran
expect money
people certainty about when they can
expect money in their bank accounts.
You say the Chancellor will do other
things so what are they? The other
steps we have ta ken
steps we have taken for example,
enabling people to access employment
support from day one. Removing the
minimum income floor
minimum income ﬂoorfrom Universal
minimum income ﬂoor from Universal
Credit. We
minimum income ﬂoorfrom Universal
Credit. We have put more money
generally into the benefit system
for the benefit of everyone, around
£7 billion extra. We have made some
particular benefits that will be
important to people, like Beverley
important to peopla, like Beverlay
you
important to peopla, like Bevertay
you just heard
important to people, like Beverley
you just heard from, more generous,
like housing benefit and the local
like housing benefit and the [oral
housing
like housing benefit and the local
housing allowance that will help you
remain in your home and can in some
remain in your home and ran in some
parts of the
remain in your home and can in some
parts of the country he a
significant sum of money. For
mortgage holders and renters we have
also managed to agree firstly with
the mortgage companies, the lenders,
a mortgage holiday of at least three
months so you don’t need to be
worried about that, at least for the
first few months, and we will
obviously extend that by agreement
if the coronavirus crisis continues
in three months’ time. And for
renters, we have also agreed with
the Court service a complete
moratorium on evictions so nobody,
quite rightly... For three months.
Again, I have taken powers in the
emergency legislation that has gone
through Parliament that gives me the
through Partiament that gives me the
ability as
through Parliament that gives me the
ability as Secretary of State to
increase that to six months if
needed. That gives people some
certainty at least that there is
absolutely no reason they should
lose their home as a result. I know
this is very imperfect, and none of
us would want to make statements
like that, but we are trying to use
all the levers available to us as
government to give people the
greatest degree of security possible
in the circumstances. Can I pick up
in the circumstances. (“an I pick up
on a couple of
in the circumstances. Can I pick up
on a couple of points from that? The
first thing is, those people renting
accommodation, and let say they are
sharing a ﬂat and one of them
sharing a flat and one of them might
sharing a ﬂat and one of them might
be self—employed or might be in
be self-employed or might be in
insecure
be self—employed or might be in
insecure work. And a gang of kids
now renting a place can’t meet the
rent. All right, they can’t get
evicted for three months but the
truth is it usually takes two months
to evict people anyway, so actually
to evict peopla anyway, so actually
they only
to evict people anyway, so actually
they only get one month and I don’t
think that is sufficient and I don’t
think it gives people security at a
think it gives peopla security at a
time
think it gives people security at a
time like this. I do think if you
have powers to do it then do it and
make sure no one is evicted for six
months. Let’s do that now and I
think it be sorted out. There’s a
couple of other points you raised.
Brieﬂy
Briefly please because we have a lot
Brieﬂy please because we have a lot
of questions.
Briefly please because we have a lot
of questions. There are many other
EWUPS-
groups, like many on zero—hours
groups, like many on zero-hours
contracts, or
groups, like many on zero—hours
contracts, or carers providing
social care. This is also in your
social rare. This is also in your
brief. People
social care. This is also in your
brief. People on zero—hour contracts
brief. People on zero-hour contracts
don’t get
brief. People on zero—hour contracts
don’t get sickness benefit if they
are off sick but they are the ones
looking after the most sick, the
most vulnerable, the elderly and
most vulnerabla, the elderty and
going house
most vulnerable, the elderly and
going house to house to look after
them. If they get sick themselves
they don’t get any benefit, that
must be wrong. Nothing is done for
those on zero—hours contracts and
those on zero-hours contracts and
the
those on zero—hours contracts and
the government really must look at
that as well. Are you going to be
looking at that? We have taken
steps, including the things I have
described to help self—employed
described to help self-employed
peopla.
described to help self—employed
people. And zero—hours contracts?
peopla. And zero-hours contracts?
These things
people. And zero—hours contracts?
These things apply to those
individuals. The benefit system is
the most effective way of getting
money to people quickly to ensure
those people can get... So I can be
those peopla ran get... So I ran be
clear... On
those people can get... 50 I can be
clear... On the renters. There is a
dear... On the renters. There is a
complete
clear... On the renters. There is a
complete moratorium on evictions
which has never happened before. It
didn’t happen in 2008 under the last
labour
Labour government. This is an
labour government. This is an
unusual step
Labour government. This is an
unusual step we have taken and we
have the powers to extend that to
six months. To be clear on zero—hour
six months. To be clear on zero-hour
contracts and
six months. To be clear on zero—hour
contracts and those on social care,
contracts and those on social rare,
for a
contracts and those on social care,
for a zero—hour contract worker who
for a zero-hour contract worker who
is not able
for a zero—hour contract worker who
is not able to work do they get
Universal Credit? Universal Credit
will be more generous and they can
will be more generous and they ran
access it
will be more generous and they can
access it immediately because they
ran get a loan
can get a loan under the Universal
ran get a loan under the Universal
Credit system.
can get a loan under the Universal
Credit system. You can get a loan on
Credit system. You ran get a loan on
future
Credit system. You can get a loan on
future benefits and apply for
Universal Credit even though they
are not actually available for work
because they are sick? They can get
because they are sick? They ran get
access to
because they are sick? They can get
access to money immediately, that’s
the most important point. We have
another point from Adam Booth, 3 GP
another point from Adam Booth, a GP
in Shrewsbury.
another point from Adam Booth, 3 GP
in Shrewsbury. Good evening. I am a
[oral GP
local GP and unfortunately I have
[oral GP and unfortunately I have
had to
local GP and unfortunately I have
had to self—isolate for the past
had to self-isolate for the past
week
had to self—isolate for the past
week and a half. I have not been
able to get remote access to be able
to work from home, there has been no
testing for NHS staff and my
colleagues on the front line have
had to go and buy their own scrubs
and eye equipment from DIY stores
because the personal protective
equipment has not been adequate. I
would have thought that these were
problems that could be anticipated
problams that could be anticipated
and
problems that could be anticipated
and dealt with in advance. I would
like to know what specific problems
like to know what specific problams
peopla
like to know what specific problems
people expect the NHS to have in the
next few weeks and months and what
they think ran
they think can be done in advance to
they think ran be done in advance to
sort them
they think can be done in advance to
sort them out. Richard, there are
two aspects to this. First, how have
we got to this point and was enough
done to stop it, and is there
anything coming down the track we
need to prepare for now? First of
all, I receive 20 or 30 messages a
day from front line NHS workers
across the country telling stories
"TY
very similar to what Adam was just
telling us. Honestly, I’m sorry to
55V
say this, it is a national scandal.
We shouldn’t be in this position. We
knew in the last week of January
knew in the last week of january
that
knew in the last week of January
that this was coming. The message
from China was absolutely clear,
that a new virus with pandemic
potential was hitting cities, people
were being admitted to hospital,
admitted to intensive care units and
admitted to intensive rare units and
dying, and the
admitted to intensive care units and
dying, and the mortality was
growing. We knew that 11 weeks ago
and then we wasted February when we
could have acted. Time when we could
have amped up testing, time when we
could have got personal protective
equipment ready and disseminated and
we didn’t do it. I am hearing that
not just a
notjust a personal protective
not just a personal protective
equipment
notjust a personal protective
equipment is not available, it is
the wrong kind of personal
protective equipment. What we have
protective equipment. what we have
is not
protective equipment. What we have
is not even WHO standard. We are
putting our health workers, who we
have just all applauded
havejust all applauded here, in
putting our health workers, who we
have just all applauded here, in the
front lines without the armour they
need to defend themselves. They are
wearing surgical masks which are not
WHO standard, they wear thin plastic
aprons which are not standard and
they are wearing rubber gloves that
they are wearing mbber gloves that
only cover
they are wearing rubber gloves that
only cover their wrists, exposing
their arms to danger and jeopardy.
That is nothing short of a national
scandal. How could we allow this to
happen? The hypocrisy of clapping
NHS workers and yet the government
not supporting them to go into that
front line is tragic, and it was
preventable, I am sorry to say but
it was preventable. We had the
Secretary of State for Health on the
programme last week and I questioned
him pretty closely about supply of
equipment. Matt Hancock was saying
in innumerable numbers of lorries
would be out over the weekend, this
was last Thursday, and he said by
Sunday, all hospitals would have
sufficient personal protective
equipment and here we are one week
on and know they don’t. You have
heard what Richard had to say. This
is a big challenge but we are
ramping up supply rapidly. I’m sorry
to hear of the problem at Shrewsbury
Hospital. You can’t be surprised by
what you have heard because we have
been hearing it since last week. I
am hearing it myself and I am a
Cabinet minister responsible for
[oral
local government looking after
[oral government looking after
social
local government looking after
social care so I hear
social care so I hearfrom
local government looking after
social care so I hear from social
social rare so I hear from social
rare providers
social care so I hear from social
care providers as well. We need to
rare providers as well. We need to
get this
care providers as well. We need to
get this equipment not
get this equipment notjust to
get this equipment not just to
hospitals
get this equipment notjust to
hospitals but to care homes,
pharmacies, GPs, those in homeless
shelters and other important
settings. We are now getting
significant quantities, tens of
millions of treatment items from
gloves and face mask and other items
of PPE ﬂowing
of PPE flowing through. This has now
of PPE ﬂowing through. This has now
become a
of PPE flowing through. This has now
become a military operation for us.
We have seen pictures of the Armed
Forces delivering this to hospitals.
Richard is shaking his head.
SuppUes
Supplies are flowing through to
Supplies are ﬂowing through to
hospitals.
Supplies are flowing through to
hospitals. Robert, can you tell us
hospitals. Robert, ran you tell us
tonight, there
hospitals. Robert, can you tell us
tonight, there will be a number of
GPs and those working in the health
rare system
care system watching at home, when
rare system watching at home, when
do you think
care system watching at home, when
do you think people who need it in
the health system will have the
correct and sufficient personal
protective equipment, when will that
be? I can’t give you an exact time.
So you don’t know? What I do know is
So you don’t know? what I do know is
in the last
So you don’t know? What I do know is
in the last 48 hours, 25 million
packs of gloves have been delivered
and 15 million facemasks. Almost 2
million items of eye protection.
These are large quantities. We
probably need much more than that
but we are ramping it up. Robert,
listen, I know what you think you
are saying is true, I know that you
believe it but it it simply not
tme.
true. These are the messages I have
tme. These are the messages I have
had today. The
true. These are the messages I have
had today. The lack of clear
guidance on testing is causing huge
anxiety. Totally inadequate PPE.
Being sent like lambs to the
slaughter. Inadequate PPE. No scrubs
and no testing equipment.
Sleepwalking into this totally
unequipped and no prepared when we
had the luxury of two months to
prepare that other countries didn’t.
That’s why it is a national scandal.
We need to get much more equipment
out there and it is happening.
Primarily now PPE is a logistical
question. We have very large stocks
and we need to get it to the front
line. On testing, we are increasing
the amount of testing available and
again we need to go further because
this is all about testing. One day
last week I think we reached 8000
tests. We are averaging somewhat
below that and we want to get up to
10,000, and ultimately 25000 and
then 250,000. There is a huge effort
to be done. 0n the antibody test,
to be done. On the antibody test,
the test for people who have already
the test for peopla who have already
had it,
the test for people who have already
had it, there we have already
ordered 3.5 million of those tests.
We are testing that test to ensure
it is reliable. As the Chief Medical
Officer has said, that is very
important, there is nothing worse
than an unreliable test, but if we
prove it is reliable then we have
millions of those flowing and within
millions of those ﬂowing and within
weeks they
millions of those flowing and within
weeks they should be in the system.
Sticking to the personal protective
equipment for the moment, because
that is what Adam was asking about.
Humphrey, what is your view? What I
Humphrey, what is your view? what I
have to say to
Humphrey, what is your view? What I
have to say to Adam, again, a huge
thank you for everything he and the
hundreds of thousands of GPs who are
in many situations in the front line
of what is happening here. I have
good friends who are GPs who are
doing tests of patients and checking
them in the car parks of surgeries
them in the rar parks of surgeries
because
them in the car parks of surgeries
because it is not safe to bring them
inside, and they are working double,
inside, and they are working doubla,
tripla and
inside, and they are working double,
triple and quadruple shift
sometimes. A huge thank you to what
is going on in that regard. I have
to say I have a lot of sympathy with
the views Richard expressed. It is
hard to understand why we got caught
hard to understand why we got taught
as short
hard to understand why we got caught
as short as we did in this crisis.
Why
why we didn’t
as short as we did in this crisis.
Why we didn’t have the foresight to
understand more and take the steps
we could have taken with equipment,
tests and many other aspects of what
we need to be ready for this. I’m
not talking about long—range
not talking about long-range
planning
not talking about long—range
planning over two or three years,
I’m saying when we saw it happen in
China and then Italy so close to
home. I have good friends in Italy
who hi have been speaking to on the
phone since late January and early
phone since late january and earty
February and
phone since late January and early
February and it was very clear what
was happening. I think the
government has to take away these
lessons from that. Of course, that
lassons from that. Of course, that
doesn’t help
lessons from that. Of course, that
doesn’t help now, now it is about
getting stuff through the front
line. That is a logistics and
business problem and I know a little
bit about those things will stop
it’s about making sure you have so
much focus on managing the supply
and ﬂow
and flow of product and I hope the
and ﬂow of product and I hope the
government is
and flow of product and I hope the
government is getting the best help
it ran
it can there because that absolutely
it ran there because that absolutely
is a
it can there because that absolutely
is a solvable problem stop if there
are 30 million pairs of gloves in
the country then they absolutely
should and could be with people in
should and could be with peopla in
the front
should and could be with people in
the front line so let’s get that
done. A tweet from Christopher Luke,
a psychiatric nurse working on an
acute mental health what will stop
myself and many colleagues feel
patients and staff have been all but
forgotten about. We have very little
in the way of PPE, personal
protective equipment, and mental
health hospitals across the country
are not equipped for something like
Covid-19
Covid—19 and there has been no
Covid-19 and there has been no
coverage
Covid—19 and there has been no
coverage about how mental health
hospitals are coping. What
provisions are being made for staff
and patients in psychiatric
hospitals taking into consideration
the level of risk we work with a
side from the risk of catching
Covid—19. Absolutely. We ask people
Covid-19. Absolutely. We ask peopla
to do
Covid—19. Absolutely. We ask people
to do everything to look after us at
our most vulnerable. We applaud
them, we love them, we love their
self-sacrifice,
self—sacrifice, but we don’t seem to
self-sacrifice, but we don’t seem to
be able to
self—sacrifice, but we don’t seem to
be able to provide the most basic
protection. In Michael local
protection. In Michael [oral
authority, I
protection. In Michael local
authority, I know we got 300 masks
and gloves and wipes. But
and gloves and wipes. Butjust 300.
and gloves and wipes. But just 300.
-- in my [oral
and gloves and wipes. Butjust 300.
—— in my local authority. They had
-- in my [oral authority. They had
to work out
—— in my local authority. They had
to work out who would get them and
who wouldn’t. For social care
who wouldn’t. For social rare
workers,
who wouldn’t. For social care
workers, people on zero—hour
workers, peopla on zero-hour
contracts,
workers, people on zero—hour
contracts, those working with the
most vulnerable, how many of those
most vulnerabla, how many of those
ran have
most vulnerable, how many of those
can have the most basic maths, that
ran have the most basic maths, that
are not
can have the most basic maths, that
are not even of WHO standard anyway.
-- basic
—— basic masks. There is a risk of
-- basic masks. There is a risk of
those people
—— basic masks. There is a risk of
those people catching it themselves
and they may also be spreading it,
which is the last thing they want to
be. People going into A&E, working
be. People going into AaE, working
there,
be. People going into A&E, working
there, cleaning in there, the last
thing they want to do is be part of
the problem. They want to be part of
the solution and if we are not able
to provide those basic things then
dearty we
clearly we have a problem. But I
dearty we have a problem. But I
actually think
clearly we have a problem. But I
actually think it is about testing.
The head of the WHO said this is all
about test, test, test. The
government might have 3.5 million
tests to find out if we have had it,
we should have had those sorts of
numbers, surely, for tests as to
whether or not people actually have
whether or not peopla actually have
it at the
whether or not people actually have
it at the moment so we can know
it at the moment so we ran know
whether or
it at the moment so we can know
whether or not they ought to be
working in A&E or whether they are
working in “IE or whether they are
spreading it.
working in A&E or whether they are
spreading it. How can we possibly
spreading it. How ran we possibly
work out
spreading it. How can we possibly
work out who is catching it and who
we might have given it to if we
don’t know we have had it ourselves?
So many people are not even asked to
all
(211111 but
So many people are not even asked to
call 111 but to look up online the
(211111 but to look up online the
symptoms
call 111 but to look up online the
symptoms and then self—isolate. As a
symptoms and then self-isolate. As a
country at the
symptoms and then self—isolate. As a
country at the moment we don’t seem
to have any idea really apart from
deaths as to how many people even
have the disease, which does make it
really difficult to manage.
That is a good point. We saw the
research coming out from Oxford. As
a statistician earlier in my life I
a statistician eartier in my life I
thought we
a statistician earlier in my life I
thought we could have at least
worked out some tests in the country
to give us at least a guide to what
the penetration rate of the virus is
and that would be enormously
helpful. When we knew this was
helpful. when we knew this was
coming late
helpful. When we knew this was
coming late January, early February,
coming late january, earty Febmary,
the
coming late January, early February,
the standard public health approach
to an epidemic issue test, test,
test. Then in an infectious outbreak
you isolate, you quarantine, you
contact trays, you track down every
singla
singlc contact
contact trays, you track down every
single contact and test that person
singla contact and test that person
as well
single contact and test that person
as well to see if you can extinguish
as well to see if you ran extinguish
and stop the
as well to see if you can extinguish
and stop the lines of transmission.
That is the way you stop the
outbreak. We did not do that. We
forgot the most fundamental
principlas
principles of outbreak control. We
principlas of outbreak control. We
did do
did do contact tracing. To begin
with. You are not doing that now. We
were acting upon expert medical
advice and I appreciate they can
advice and I appreciate they ran
have
advice and I appreciate they can
have differences of opinion, the
media
medics and the scientist. Nothing is
media and the scientist. Nothing is
dear-cut
medics and the scientist. Nothing is
clear—cut in a situation like this,
dear-cut in a situation like this,
but we are
clear—cut in a situation like this,
but we are guided by them. The
contact tracing that was done for
example from the people coming from
China and other areas appeared to be
successful and was held up well by
international standards. But that
did not stop the epidemic, did it?
In fact the strategy we ended up
following because we wanted to get
601:
60% of the population infected
because we made the mistake in
judgment that we thought it was a
mild infection. The policy the
government had, advised by the Chief
Medical Officer and our chief
scientific adviser, is to save as
many people’s lives as possible.
That message changed ten days ago.
In the earty
In the early part of the epidemic it
In the earty part of the epidemic it
was not
In the early part of the epidemic it
was not the case that the message
was not the rase that the message
was protect
was not the case that the message
was protect the NHS and save lives.
The message was, we are going to
manage an epidemic in the
population, get to 60%, get to herd
population, get to 6096, get to herd
immunity. But
population, get to 60%, get to herd
immunity. But there are many
examples of people on the record,
from the chief scientific adviser,
two statisticians and modellers as
part of the early stage, advising
part of the earty stage, advising
the
part of the early stage, advising
the government and saying that was
the objective. Then you stopped it
when you realise the NHS could not
cope with the intensity. The
government policy today is very
dear
clear that we all need to play a
part by staying at home, that is the
best way to protect the NHS and that
is the way within all of our power
we ran help to
we can help to save lives. It is six
we ran help to save lives. It is six
weeks too
we can help to save lives. It is six
weeks too late. I accept it is
government policy now, but don’t you
agree that it is ironic as a country
we are the country that invented the
test, but we seem to be the country
without it and everybody else seems
to be able to test and yet Britain
is testing so little. I don’t think
that is fair. There are countries
that have tested more than we have,
but the testing that we have is
broadly similar to other major
countries. Germany has
countries. Germany hasjust
countries. Germany has just
increased
countries. Germany hasjust
increased the number of tests. We
have heard a lot about the supply
problam,
problem, getting enough test, which
problam, getting enough test, which
sounds
problem, getting enough test, which
sounds plausible. Germany somehow
seems to be circumventing that
sunplv
supply problem and has now increased
its testing to 500,000 a week. The
UK has tested 90,000 overall. How is
Germany getting past the supply
problem and we are not? What we are
problem and we are not? what we are
trying to do is to
problem and we are not? What we are
trying to do is to ramp up
production as quickly as we can.
production as quickly as we ran.
Everyone
production as quickly as we can.
Everyone understands the NHS, the
Department of Health, the industry,
is working as hard as possible, we
are working around the clock to do
this, nobody is going slow on this.
No one is suggesting that. There is
reason to believe the testing will
be able to step up quite
significantly in the next week or
so, it is going in a positive
direction on that. Then there is the
potential of the antibody test and
there are millions of those that are
available, if it can be proven to be
availabla, if it ran be proven to be
reliabla, and
available, if it can be proven to be
reliable, and that could be a game
reliabla, and that could be a game
changer. Let’s
reliable, and that could be a game
changer. Let’s take another
question. There are so many
different aspects of this whole
thing that we need to talk about.
Let’s hear from Joanne,
Let’s hearfrom Joanne, who is from
Let’s hear from joanne, who is from
Shrewsbury,
Let’s hearfrom Joanne, who is from
Shrewsbury, who is an NHS
administrator. Has the lack of
clarity and government guidance led
to a situation where companies and
peopla ran
people can deliberately or
unintentionally misinterpret the
mles.
rules. For example, construction
mles. For example, constmction
companies and
rules. For example, construction
companies and nonessential shops
stay open, leading to crowded
transport and continuing with social
gatherings. Humphrey, what is your
view on this? It is a good question
from joanne.
from Joanne. From my point of view,
from joanne. From my point of view,
there was
from Joanne. From my point of view,
there was no lack of clarity at all
in terms of what came through an
acrylic to the government and the
Prime Minister. He was crystal clear
when he wanted things to change in
the last week or so. There are
questions about whether earlier in
questions about whether eartier in
the process
questions about whether earlier in
the process things were quite as
clear, but we were left in no doubt
when Friday night came that we had
to cease operating and do it
quickly. I don’t think there was any
doubt for people on Monday night
doubt for peopla on Monday night
about
doubt for people on Monday night
about the seriousness of the message
that the Prime Minister was sending
to everybody in the country, and the
expectations that he said, that we
really do stay—at—home and only
essential work or essential travel
should be undertaken. For some time
prior to our closure we had been
working predominantly, in fact
overwhelmingly, from the point of
view from our offices by
home—working and we had trialled
home-working and we had trialled
that to
home—working and we had trialled
that to check that we were able to
do that and all the technology work.
We moved all our technology people
out, on our website we reset all our
CCTV operations, so we were well
prepared for it. I think it is very
important that the guidance is clear
and I think it is important that
there is some enforcement behind it
as well. It is very clear if you
read the established literature that
if we are going to suppress this
virus and really bear down on spread
and get the vital number well below
zero, we have to accept a period,
Richard will echo this, we have to
accept a period of really tight
dose
close down and locked out. There is
a really national obligation to
observe that. It is disheartening
when you hear the evening after the
Prime Minister did what he did that
people were having barbecues in
their gardens and having 30 or A0
their gardens and having 30 or 40
peopla
their gardens and having 30 or A0
people around for a laugh and
peopla around for a laugh and
thinking it
people around for a laugh and
thinking it was fun. This is not
fun. I have got an 85—year—old
fun. I have got an 85-year-old
father, a
fun. I have got an 85—year—old
father, a wonderful guy, in a house
in lockdown, I hope, in Devon, and I
want another
want anotherfive
in lockdown, I hope, in Devon, and I
want another five years from him at
least. He is thinking, only five?! I
think all of us have to remember
this is not about something
nebulous, we have all got
grandparents or older friends and
relatives and people who are
vulnerable because they are diabetic
or have a condition, this is not a
dissociated threat that we face,
this is personal and there is a real
obligation for that. Keep the
guidance clear and we shall follow.
joanne is
Joanne is asking is the guidance
joanne is asking is the guidance
dear
clear enough
Joanne is asking is the guidance
clear enough as opposed to who
should be going to work? Sorry,
Richard. Let me read a tweet from
Lorraine Kelly, not the one of ITV,
I assume.
Iassume. I
Lorraine Kelly, not the one of ITV,
I assume. I don’t know, if you are
watching. why
watching. Why are construction
workers are still putting themselves
at risk on nonessential construction
at risk on nonessential constmction
sites? My
at risk on nonessential construction
sites? My husband is working on an
NHS to site, which I am sure at this
moment in time is not essential. I
have seen many posts that show
construction sites rammed with
constmction sites rammed with
peopla and
construction sites rammed with
people and no sanitisers or soap
peopla and no sanitisers or soap
dispensers.
people and no sanitisers or soap
dispensers. Why is the government
dispensers. why is the government
not shutting
dispensers. Why is the government
not shutting down all nonessential
construction sites? At the bottom of
constmction sites? At the bottom of
my road
construction sites? At the bottom of
my road people are having a house
my road peopla are having a house
built and I
my road people are having a house
built and I spoke to the building
foreman and he said it was
impossible for them to remain
socially distant, but they had to
come to work. We have to shut it
down. I completely agree with what
Humphrey is saying and the spirit of
the question. The story from China
is very instructive and this is what
we have to prepare the public for.
Wuhan, a city of 11 million people
Wuhan, a city of 11 million peopla
were
Wuhan, a city of 11 million people
were shut
were shutdown on
Wuhan, a city of 11 million people
were shutdown onJanuary the 23rd.
were shut down on january the 23rd.
The best
were shut down onJanuary the 23rd.
The best estimates now are that
those restrictions are only going to
be able to be lifted in early April.
That is roughly 11—12 weeks of a
That is roughly 11-12 weeks of a
city being
That is roughly 11—12 weeks of a
city being entirely shut
city being entirely shutdown in the
city being entirely shut down in the
“Y
way only
city being entirely shutdown in the
way only China knows how to shut
down a city. We have shut
down a city. We have shutdown, and
down a city. We have shut down, and
I agree the
down a city. We have shutdown, and
I agree the government has taken
vital steps in this lockdown, but we
have to really, really shut it down.
You have got to shut it down as
close to 100% as possible. Even
dose to10096 as possible. Even
then, I
close to 100% as possible. Even
then, I know we are not China, even
then we have to prepare the public
for 11-12
for 11—12 weeks of this before we
for 11-12 weeks of this before we
ran start
for 11—12 weeks of this before we
can start even thinking about
ran start even thinking about
lifting
can start even thinking about
lifting restrictions. If we don’t
shut it down, it will be longer than
that. That is why it is so critical
that the public understand the
seriousness of the responsibility
that everyone us holds. Robert, when
it comes to construction sites, for
it comes to constmction sites, for
example, with
it comes to construction sites, for
example, with people crammed onto
pub“:
public transport, why are you not
shutting nonessential construction
shutting nonessential constmction
sites
shutting nonessential construction
sites down? You could just do it.
Let me come to that in a moment,
rather than singling out one
occupation. The advice we received
from the scientists and the medics,
from the scientists and the media,
and
from the scientists and the medics,
and world—class experts advising us,
and world-class experts advising us,
is that
and world—class experts advising us,
is that now is the right time in the
passage of the virus to take much
more significant steps. That is what
the Prime Minister announced on
Monday. In general, there has been a
great degree of compliance with
that. Most people understand there
is a moral obligation on all of us
to protect others, even if you are
not concerned about your own health.
Retailers and business owners,
including owners of
including owners ofJames, have had
including owners of james, have had
to bear a huge
including owners ofJames, have had
to bear a huge burden from that, and
to hear a huge burden from that, and
the people
to bear a huge burden from that, and
the people working in them, and the
vast majority of people have
vast majority of peopla have
complied
vast majority of people have
complied across the country. We are
grateful for those employers and
employees for taking that burden on.
The advice we receive, however, is
if you are not in those nonessential
retail jobs, you
retailjobs, you can still go to
retail jobs, you ran still go to
work.
retailjobs, you can still go to
work. You need to work from home if
it is at all possible. That is
really important. Everybody should
find any way possible to do that, so
find any way possibla to do that, so
you minimise
find any way possible to do that, so
you minimise the amount of social
contact you have, but if it is
impossible to work from home, then
the medical advice was you can still
the medical advice was you ran still
do
the mediral advice was you ran still
do that.
the medical advice was you can still
do that. You need to go directly to
work, you need to be considerate
about public transport, and that
might mean things like varying the
times you go to work so everyone is
not crowded on public transport and
the tube at the same time, that is a
concern at the moment. And when you
are in the workplace your employer
needs to make sure you follow the
Pub“:
Public Health England guidelines. If
you can’t do that, it is difficult
to see how those businesses can
to see how those businesses ran
remain open.
to see how those businesses can
remain open. But in the main, they
ran do. To
can do. To take the example of
construction, Public Health England
constmction, Public Health England
have
construction, Public Health England
have worked with the construction
have worked with the constmction
leadership
have worked with the construction
leadership Council, one of the
industry bodies, to produce guidance
to the types of setting, and it will
not be all parts of the industry,
but the types of setting where it
would be safe to operate if you take
certain measures that the experts
have advised. I think that is a
sensible way forward. Are you
satisfied that is happening? There
are so many examples coming in. I
gave you one myself. I have seen
some examples where it is concerning
and those employers now need to take
action. There are also lots of
examples where it is sensible. We
all have to appreciate these are
difficult decisions and when you are
considering looking down, as the
term is, there is a balance to be
struck. If you go too far, then it
is not sustainable and you cannot
is not sustainable and you rannot
keep society
is not sustainable and you cannot
keep society with you for 11 or 12
weeks. You also need some parts of
the economy, frankly, to be able to
continue to operate, because we need
people to be in work as far as they
peopla to be in work as far as they
ran be, we
people to be in work as far as they
can be, we need to produce things,
ran be, we need to produce things,
we do
can be, we need to produce things,
we do need to maintain the roads and
the railways. In the construction
the railways. In the constmction
industry we
the railways. In the construction
industry we certainly need buildings
to be well so they are safe and
hygienic. We need to ensure really
important programmes continue, like
the removal of dangerous cladding
from buildings, the programme that
we launched after the Grenfell fire.
we hunched after the Grenfell fire.
There are
we launched after the Grenfell fire.
There are a lot of settings where it
is in the public interest that work
continues. We in government have to
strike a sensible balance to keep as
many people in work, and as much of
many peopla in work, and as much of
the economy
many people in work, and as much of
the economy functioning as possible,
whilst protecting public health.
Every time we take those steps, I
ran
can assure
Every time we take those steps, I
ran assure you
can assure you that we are doing it
ran assure you that we are doing it
carefully and
can assure you that we are doing it
carefully and on the best advice
from the medics and the scientists.
from the media and the scientists.
I hear you and I
from the medics and the scientists.
I hear you and I am
I hearyou and I am not
from the medics and the scientists.
I hear you and I am not pretending
that this is in any way an easy
thing because I get the sense from
the government that there is
attention between those who are very
keen on keeping the economy going,
and one completely understands that,
and those that are primarily keen on
protecting public health. I have to
55V
say that I think the protection of
life tmmps
life trumps everything and ought to
life tmmps everything and ought to
tmmp
life trumps everything and ought to
trump everything. And so was, of
tmmp everything. And so was, of
course, ideally
trump everything. And so was, of
course, ideally we want to keep our
economy going, we
economy going, wejust
course, ideally we want to keep our
economy going, we just have to not
compromise when it comes to people
compromise when it comes to peopla
going to work
compromise when it comes to people
going to work on public transport in
order to build a block of flats,
order to build a block of ﬂats,
which they
order to build a block of flats,
which they simply can’t put the
windows in was being two metres
apart. You just cannot do the work.
I don’t understand that it is done
so publicly. I don’t understand why
they are still allowed to do it and
why the government does not make it
clear that this is not on, they are
not to work in that way, this is not
essential work.
essentialwork. I
not to work in that way, this is not
essential work. I hear what you say
about there being sometimes when you
need to have builders, of course you
do. You cannot have an elderly
do. You cannot have an elderty
person whose
do. You cannot have an elderly
person whose heater stops working.
They need to have hot water. Those
circumstances are one thing, but
building and the construction
workers at the moment does not make
any sense. The problem is, I think
the vast majority of British people
the vast majority of British peopla
want to
the vast majority of British people
want to do the right thing, faced
with this terrible crisis. But what
they need is clear leadership and
they need as part of that
leadership, first of all, this is
what we expect you to do, but they
also need as part of that
leadership, and this is what we will
do for you in return, so we will
make sure that you have an income,
no matter who you are. That there
will be food available for you, when
you go to the shops there will be a
proper supply of food and you will
not lose your home. And obviously we
are doing everything we can to make
are doing everything we ran to make
sure the
are doing everything we can to make
sure the NHS can stand up to this
sure the NHS ran stand up to this
terrible
sure the NHS can stand up to this
terrible burden which has been
thrown at it. If we had that
partnership, then I think we can get
partnership, then I think we ran get
through this. In
partnership, then I think we can get
through this. In many ways the
government is doing the right thing,
but there are some glaring things
that you are missing and I think you
should get on with that.
To a nswer
To answer that point, we are doing
the things you have set out. The
package of measures we have now put
out for the economy to support
individuals and families, there is
no precedent in our history.
Absolutely, and I acknowledge that.
Compared to other countries who are
battling with the same problem, it
battling with the same problam, it
compares
battling with the same problem, it
compares favourably and is among the
most comprehensive package of
support among developed countries in
the world. Looking at the
initiatives, in my department in
seven days we have put together a
programme to try to deliver food
parcels to those of the 1.5 million
people who we are shielding, those
people who need to be at home for
specific medical reasons, who can’t
have face—to—face contact other than
have face-to-face contact other than
with their
have face—to—face contact other than
with their partners or members of
their household, for the next 12
weeks. For
weeks. Forthose
their household, for the next 12
weeks. For those people,
weeks. Forthose people, I
their household, for the next 12
weeks. For those people, I hope on
Saturday the first food parcels of
land on their doorsteps. Huge
efforts are happening. I’m not
saying this to seek praise for me, I
am saying it for the thousands of
peopla
people across government, from town
peopla across government, from town
halls to
people across government, from town
halls to Whitehall. But that is such
a good example of where the problem
is. It is wonderful, we have all
these volunteers. 400,000 people
coming forward to volunteer support.
500,000. It’s brilliant, probably
700,000 by the end of the night.
People want to do the right thing
and support one another. It’s great
the government is organising food
parcels and that is brilliant, but
they will arrive without masks and
without gloves because that bit has
fallen down. You don’t need a mask
to deliver a food parcel to
someone’s door. But the carer going
someone’s door. But the rarer going
in will
someone’s door. But the carer going
in will need them. All I’m saying is
that the government has done a great
deal but it needs to go further and
these things need to be said. You
were talking about the balancing act
between the economy and public
health. As you know and as the
labour Party
Labour Party has said many times,
labour Party has said many times,
austerity costs
Labour Party has said many times,
austerity costs lives. You are
saying public health trumps that
saying public health tmmps that
every time
saying public health trumps that
every time but nonetheless, there is
a balance here somewhere and won the
labour Party has
Labour Party has talked about many
labour Party has talked about many
times in
Labour Party has talked about many
times in terms of the cost of
austerity. You must be worried about
that. Getting construction workers
that. Getting constmction workers
of the
that. Getting construction workers
of the site or whoever it might be,
but the bill has to be paid by
somebody. I agree and I
somebody. I agree and Ifully
understand this is a crisis, but
when you have a crisis I am afraid
you have to do the right thing. If
we are talking about austerity than
I think it would also be right to
55V
say that we would have been in a
much better position if before this
crisis the beds in the hospitals
were not at 95% capacity, if we
were not at 9596 capacity, if we
didn’t
were not at 95% capacity, if we
didn’t have 100,000 vacancies in the
National Health Service, and if we
had as a result of austerity stops
the money we paid for nurses to get
trained. The stripping out of public
services in many ways are being
exposed by this crisis and it is
very unfortunate that the country
has gone through what it has. For
example, people proclaiming
Universal Credit for the first time
not realising what it is sent to the
changes that have been made to
benefits and how hard life really is
for those who have been living on
benefits up to now. We want to get
one member of the public in... Our
policy is about saving lives. There
is no balancing act with the
economy. We are focused on saving
lives. But there is a direct
correlation between the public
health outcome and some of these
measures because if you want to
sustain a lockdown or very
restrictive measures on all our
lives for a long period of time,
potentially 12 weeks, you have to
think very carefully about that. If
you completely close—down society,
you completely dose-down society,
if you make it
you completely close—down society,
if you make it impossible for anyone
to work or make products or services
then you may find... I am not
then you may find... lam not
calling for that,
then you may find... I am not
calling for that, of course I’m not
falling for that, of course I’m not
calling for
calling for that, of course I’m not
calling for essential products and
services to stop. What I am saying
services to stop. what I am saying
is we
services to stop. What I am saying
is we need clear leadership and if
is we need dear leadership and if
there is
is we need clear leadership and if
there is clear leadership I believe
the British people will follow. I
the British peopla will follow. I
hope
the British people will follow. I
hope we have done that because our
message to the British people
watching is very clear this evening.
If you stay at home you will protect
the NHS and save lives. With respect
the NHS and save lives. with respect
to work, it is
the NHS and save lives. With respect
to work, it is simply, work from
home if you ran
home if you can and if that is
home if you ran and if that is
impossible,
home if you can and if that is
impossible, go to work but only if
you ran follow
you can follow the guidelines from
you ran follow the guidelines from
Pub“:
you can follow the guidelines from
Public Health England and do so in a
safe manner. On clear messaging,
safe manner. On dear messaging,
Richard
safe manner. On clear messaging,
Richard was talking about a
lockdown, for want of a different
phrase, of
phrase, of“
lockdown, for want of a different
phrase, of 11 or 12 weeks. Is that
what you’re saying tonight, that’s
how long it could be, in the
government’s view? The measures we
have implemented, we said we will
review them at Easter and that is a
sensible period of time to see how
they are working. Nobody is
pretending this will be over by
Easter but we do think, and this is
backed up by medical opinion, if
each and every one of us does what
we are asked to do and we do the
things we have described, staying at
home whenever we can, if we either
home whenever we ran, if we either
don’t go to work,
home whenever we can, if we either
don’t go to work, or if we do so we
follow the guidance of Public Health
England, if we all do that then
there is reason to believe that
within that sort of period we could
see the beginnings of the turn of
the tide. But it is on all the fuss
to take those steps in our own
lives, as well as all the amazing
peopla in
people in the NHS who will be
peopla in the NHS who will be
fighting to
people in the NHS who will be
fighting to save lives. I think we
need to prepare the public for this
period of 12 weeks. We really do. It
is a really tough challenge but the
reason why we should prepare them
for that period is that if we don’t
suppress it in that 12 weeks it will
go on even longer. That’s why we
have to be tough new in order to get
have to be tough now in order to get
through this and
have to be tough new in order to get
through this and have the
have to be tough now in order to get
through this and have the economy
return, I
return, Ifully agree, returned to
some semblance of order. I think
that’s right. We have to level with
people about how tough this will be
peopla about how tough this will be
for
people about how tough this will be
for some in society. That is why the
NHS has written for example to 1.5
million people, and those letters
will have been dropping on doormats
over the course of this week. That
is saying to those people who have
is saying to those peopla who have
specific
is saying to those people who have
specific clinical reasons that put
them at high risk from this virus,
as soon as you receive this, you
should now stay—at—home for the next
should now stay-at-home for the next
12 weeks
should now stay—at—home for the next
12 weeks and have no face to face
contact the van with the loved ones
who are in your household already.
It is almost unimaginable. None of
us take this decision lightly.
Having said that, if we can look
Having said that, if we ran look
after
Having said that, if we can look
after these people, we have used the
term shielding, if you can
metaphorically put our arms around
those peopla
those people then that is the best
“Y
way of protecting the country. I
fully agree. Because they are the
most at risk people. That is why the
most at risk peopla. That is why the
work we
most at risk people. That is why the
work we are doing with getting food
parcels and delivering medicines, it
will save thousands of lives if it
works. We have had a tweet come in
in the last A0 seconds from Eleanor
in the last 40 seconds from Eleanor
Chapman who
in the last A0 seconds from Eleanor
Chapman who asks, how long does the
government anticipate this pandemic
will last and that is the $64,000
question. How long will it last and
how ran
how can we keep going if it goes on?
how ran we keep going if it goes on?
What
what is
how can we keep going if it goes on?
What is the scientific best estimate
what is the scientific best estimate
for the
What is the scientific best estimate
for the moment? We have about 20
seconds but it is an important
question. Prepare yourself for 11 or
12 weeks in this country. Remember,
this outbreak will come back, most
likely later in the year in a second
wave and possibly a third wave. We
don’t know enough about the virus
yet to be 100%
yet to be100% sure but we are
yet to be10096 sure but we are
seeing it go
yet to be100% sure but we are
seeing it go across the world east
to west, America, Latin America,
Africa, there is a lot more to come.
On that very jolly
On that veryjolly note, thank you
On that very jolly note, thank you
Richard.
On that veryjolly note, thank you
Richard. The hour is up. Question
Time will be back next week and for
the foreseeable future we will be
live at HPN on a Thursday night. Our
recorded questions came from
Shrewsbury this week. Next week we
were going to be in rugby and we
were going to be in mgby and we
will be
were going to be in rugby and we
will be there virtually at least. If
you
you want to submit a pre—recorded
you want to submit a pre-recorded
question from
you want to submit a pre—recorded
question from rugby get in touch via
question from mgby get in touch via
the
question from rugby get in touch via
the website. And if you want to join
in the conversation we have been
having here, you can listen to
having here, you ran listen to
Adrian
having here, you can listen to
Adrian Childs and guests on Question
Time extra time on radio five lives.
Thank you for being socially distant
and responsible to our panel. For
those who have got in touch, and
forgive me for not getting to the
questions from some of you. From all
of us at Question Time, and by.
Remember when the news
was nothing but...
Brexit!
Brexit deal to deal with Brexit.
Oven—ready Brexit.
Back to face a new challenge...
I’m feeling nostalgic for
the Brexit question!
Peter Kay’s back. ..
..returning with some
of his finest and funniest moments
in the new series of Comedy Shuffle.
Twin brothers...
Divided by a secret.
MUSIC: Always On My Own by Cat Power
IN NORWEGIAN:
Kristofer Hivju stars
in compelling Norwegian drama...
I lost someone who I loved
in this conflict, too.
And that makes us sisters, does it?
Eyes on, sir. Any problems,
we need to move quickly.
Sir, Lane has company.
And they’re armed.
They’re being ambushed! Move! Move!
Iflllllilill
This programme contains
some strong language.
I’vejust seen him, on my way here.
He wants something. What’s going on?
Meggie’s leaving my employment.
You’re the only one who sees me.
Mr Dorn,
you want the Prime Minister gone,
I want the Prime Minister gone.
My brother pointed a gun at me
today. I’ve got a job for you.
What are you doing, McGregor?
Quitting, Sarge. Remember
when you said we should leave?
That wasn’t serious. Lekon knows.
Help! Help, somebody! Help, quick!
Where is she? Demwa’s. But what...
Does it matter?
This bombing was
an attack on civil society.
I promise you, those responsible
will be brought to justice.
Such an act is not only callous
and cowardly, it is
an act of treason and will be met
with the full force of the state.
It pained me greatly to learn
that the target of the attack does
now appear to be my own family.
Cal, can we at least talk.
Please, mate?
Move!
As Home Secretary, I will be
rallying to broaden the police’s
powers of detention,
of surveillance and searches.
These urgent measures will take
effect immediately.
Everything all right, lads?
Yeah, we’re cool.
Right, Cal?
Yeah.